gh-119180: Documentation for PEP 649 and 749 (#122235)
python/cpython: Doc/library/annotationlib.rst

Reviewer: Some line-lengths feel a bit long in this document, could perhaps do with a re-wrap at some convienient moment?

Author: Is there any convenient tool for doing that? None of the line lengths seem extremely long right now.

Reviewer: Perhaps its my GH settings (I have left/right diffs enabled), but it means longer lines tend to wrap. We don't have linting for this, but the devguide [recommends 80 characters](https://devguide.python.org/documentation/markup/#use-of-whitespace).

I don't know of a good tool, sorry.

Reviewer 2: > Is there any convenient tool for doing that? None of the line lengths seem extremely long right now.

What I do is C/C the text somewhere, call `textwrap.wrap` + `textwrap.indent` and C/C back (I had a script for RST but I don't have it anymore)

Author: I pushed a commit yesterday limiting the line lengths to 80.

:mod:`!annotationlib` --- Functionality for introspecting annotations
=====================================================================

.. module:: annotationlib
   :synopsis: Functionality for introspecting annotations

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/annotationlib.py`

.. testsetup:: default

   import annotationlib
   from annotationlib import *

--------------

The :mod:`!annotationlib` module provides tools for introspecting :term:`annotations <annotation>`
on modules, classes, and functions.

.. function:: call_annotate_function(annotate, format, *, owner=None)

   Call the :term:`annotate function` *annotate* with the given *format*, a member of the :class:`Format`
   enum, and return the annotations dictionary produced by the function.

   Annotate functions generated by the compiler for functions, classes, and modules support only
   the :attr:`~Format.VALUE` format when called directly. This function calls the annotate function
   in a special environment that allows it to produce annotations in the other formats.

   *owner* is the object that owns the annotation function, usually a function, class, or module.

>    If provided, it is used in the :attr:`~Format.FORWARDREF` format to produce :class:`ForwardRef`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If provided, it is used in the :attr:`~Format.FORWARDREF` format to produce a :class:`ForwardRef`
```

   object that carry more information.

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. class:: Format

>    A :class:`enum.IntEnum` describing the formats in which annotations can be returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   An :class:`~enum.IntEnum` describing the formats in which annotations can be returned.
```

   Members of the enum, or their equivalent integer values, can be passed to
   :func:`get_annotations` and other functions in this module, as well as to
   :attr:`~object.__annotate__` functions.

>    .. attribute:: VALUE
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. attribute:: VALUE
      :value: 1

```

and remove "This enum member's value is equal to 1"

Author: Thanks, I should have looked harder for a native way to do this.

Thanks for the other comments too; will address them soon.

      Values are the result of evaluating the annotation expressions.

      This enum member's value is equal to 1.

   .. attribute:: FORWARDREF

      Values are real annotation values (as per :attr:`Format.VALUE` format) for defined values,
      and :class:`ForwardRef` proxies for undefined values. Real objects may be exposed to,
      or contain references to, :class:`ForwardRef` proxy objects.

      This enum member's value is equal to 2.

   .. attribute:: SOURCE

>       Values are the text string of the annotation as it appears in the source code.
>       May only be approximate; whitespace may be normalized, and constant values
>       may be optimized. It is possible the exact values of these strings could
>       change in future version of Python.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Values are the text string of the annotation as it appears in the source code,
      up to modifications including, but not restricted to, whitespace normalizations
      and constant values optimizations.

      The exact values of these strings may change in future versions of Python.
```

   when a forward reference is used in an annotation, such as when a class is
   referenced before it is defined.

   .. attribute:: __forward_arg__

      A string containing the code that was evaluated to produce the :class:`~ForwardRef`.
      The string may not be exactly equivalent to the original source.

   .. method:: evaluate(*, globals=None, locals=None, type_params=None, owner=None)

      Evaluate the forward reference, returning its value.

      This may throw an exception such as :exc:`NameError` if the forward reference
      refers to names that do not exist. The parameters to the function can be used to
      provide bindings for names that would otherwise be undefined.

      *globals* and *locals* are passed to :func:`eval()`, representing the global and
      local namespaces in which the name is evaluated. *type_params*, if given, must be
      a tuple of :ref:`type parameters <type-params>` that are in scope while the forward
      reference is being evaluated. *owner* is the object that owns the annotation from
      which the forward reference derives, usually a function, class, or module.

>       :class:`~ForwardRef` instances returned by :func:`get_annotations` retain

Reviewer 2: So, the *owner* parameter could somewhat be deprecated? or are there cases when it's really needed (or when we can use it for faking things?)

Author: The explicit parameter is relevant when ForwardRef objects are created other than by get_annotations(). For example, the typing module creates ForwardRef objects directly.

Reviewer 2: Ok. So maybe for the user, it would just be clearer if you don't say that you don't need to pass them explicitly I think (or maybe say something along the lines "most of the time, you don't need to").

Author: Pushing an expansion of this paragraph.

Reviewer 2: Thanks. Do you want me to review what you've pushed now or do you want to first correct all the occurrences of `()` inside `:func:` and usages of <code>\`\`</code> instead of `*`? (just ping me when you want a review/re-request a review)

Author: Thanks, I'll fix the rest of those too, and add documentation for some things I added in PRs that were just merged.

      a reference to their owner, so it is not necessary to pass it in explicitly.

      Once a :class:`~ForwardRef` instance has been evaluated, it caches the evaluated
      value, and future calls to :meth:`evaluate` will return the cached value, regardless
      of the parameters passed in.

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. function:: get_annotate_function(obj)

   Retrieve the :term:`annotate function` for *obj*. Return ``None`` if *obj* does not have an
   annotate function.

   This is usually equivalent to accessing the :attr:`~object.__annotate__` attribute of *obj*,
   but direct access to the attribute may return the wrong object in certain situations involving
   metaclasses. It is recommended to use this function instead of accessing the attribute directly.

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. function:: get_annotations(obj, *, globals=None, locals=None, eval_str=False, format=Format.VALUE)

   Compute the annotations dict for an object.

>    ``obj`` may be a callable, class, module, or other object with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   *obj* may be a callable, class, module, or other object with
```

   :attr:`~object.__annotate__` and :attr:`~object.__annotations__` attributes.
   Passing in an object of any other type raises :exc:`TypeError`.

>    The *format* parameter controls the format in which annotations are returned:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The *format* parameter controls the format in which annotations are returned.
```

>    Returns a dict.  ``get_annotations()`` returns a new dict every time
>    it's called; calling it twice on the same object will return two
>    different but equivalent dicts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. note::

      This function returns a *new* dict every time it's called; calling it
      twice on the same object returns two different but equivalent dicts.
```

Author: Why should this be indented into a note? I feel that makes the text noisier.

Reviewer 2: You'll have a nice box around this (important) behaviour. Since your bullet list contained "Always, always, always creates a new dict", I feel this behaviour should be highlighted. I used "note" but you can also use "important" or "tip".

   This function handles several details for you:

>    * If ``eval_str`` is true, values of type ``str`` will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * If *eval_str* is true, values of type ``str`` will
```

I'll let you change the other occurrences of using double backticks instead of `*`.

>      be un-stringized using :func:`eval()`.  This is intended

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     be un-stringized using :func:`eval`.  This is intended
```

I'll let you change the other occurrences.

     for use with stringized annotations
     (``from __future__ import annotations``). It is an error
     to set ``eval_str`` to true with formats other than :attr:`Format.VALUE`.
   * If ``obj`` doesn't have an annotations dict, returns an
     empty dict.  (Functions and methods always have an
     annotations dict; classes, modules, and other types of
     callables may not.)
   * Ignores inherited annotations on classes, as well as annotations
     on metaclasses.  If a class
     doesn't have its own annotations dict, returns an empty dict.
   * All accesses to object members and dict values are done
     using ``getattr()`` and ``dict.get()`` for safety.

>    * Always, always, always returns a freshly created dict.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The note should be sufficient.

   ``eval_str`` controls whether or not values of type ``str`` are replaced
   with the result of calling :func:`eval()` on those values:

   * If eval_str is true, :func:`eval()` is called on values of type ``str``.

>      (Note that ``get_annotations`` doesn't catch exceptions; if :func:`eval()`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     (Note that :func:`get_annotations` doesn't catch exceptions; if :func:`eval`
```

(and I'll let you handle the other occurrences)

     raises an exception, it will unwind the stack past the ``get_annotations``
     call.)

>    * If eval_str is false (the default), values of type ``str`` are unchanged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * If *eval_str* is false (the default), values of type ``str`` are unchanged.
```

   ``globals`` and ``locals`` are passed in to :func:`eval()`; see the documentation
   for :func:`eval()` for more information.  If ``globals`` or ``locals``
   is ``None``, this function may replace that value with a context-specific
   default, contingent on ``type(obj)``:

   * If ``obj`` is a module, ``globals`` defaults to ``obj.__dict__``.
   * If ``obj`` is a class, ``globals`` defaults to
     ``sys.modules[obj.__module__].__dict__`` and ``locals`` defaults
     to the ``obj`` class namespace.
   * If ``obj`` is a callable, ``globals`` defaults to
     :attr:`obj.__globals__ <function.__globals__>`,
     although if ``obj`` is a wrapped function (using

>      :func:`functools.update_wrapper`) it is first unwrapped.

Reviewer 2: Might be silly, but how about using a table? Maybe it'll be easier to read as a user.

Author: Feels unnecessary to me.

>      :func:`functools.update_wrapper`) it is first unwrapped.

Reviewer 2: Is it being unwrapped as much as possible or only one?

Author: It's repeated, will add that.

:mod:`!annotationlib` --- Functionality for introspecting annotations
=====================================================================

.. module:: annotationlib
   :synopsis: Functionality for introspecting annotations

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/annotationlib.py`

.. testsetup:: default

   import annotationlib
   from annotationlib import *

--------------

The :mod:`!annotationlib` module provides tools for introspecting :term:`annotations <annotation>`

> on modules, classes, and functions.

Reviewer: Potentially this could be added later, but I think a longer narrative summary of ``annotationlib`` and where it fits in could be of use -- we jump straight into functions here. Contrast with [pathlib](https://docs.python.org/dev/library/pathlib.html), [heapq](https://docs.python.org/dev/library/heapq.html), [hashlib](https://docs.python.org/dev/library/hashlib.html).

I wonder if there are words from [749](https://peps.python.org/pep-0749/#new-annotationlib-module) that we could incorporate? Effectively, something that briefly talks to where this module fits into the landscape, perhaps aimed at the fairly experienced user of `types`/`inspect`/`typing`, but someone who hasn't followed the PEPs.

Author: Yes, I was thinking of adding that too, but ran out of energy while working on the initial version. :) I'll probably work on this later.

Author: I wrote such a summary now, along with a historical account of annotation semantics, since that seems like something the docs should cover.

.. function:: call_annotate_function(annotate, format, *, owner=None)

   Call the :term:`annotate function` *annotate* with the given *format*, a member of the :class:`Format`
   enum, and return the annotations dictionary produced by the function.

>    Annotate functions generated by the compiler for functions, classes, and modules support only
>    the :attr:`~Format.VALUE` format when called directly. This function calls the annotate function
>    in a special environment that allows it to produce annotations in the other formats.

Reviewer: I think this might be worth emphasising, as a reader might be confused as to why this indirection is needed.

Perhaps (with words stolen from 749):

```suggestion
   This helper function is required because annotate functions generated by
   the :term:`bytecode` compiler for functions, classes, and modules only support
   the :attr:`~Format.VALUE` format when called directly.
   To support other :class:`Format` values, this function calls the annotate function
   in a special :PEP:`"fake globals" <649#the-stringizer-and-the-fake-globals-environment>`
   environment that allows it to produce annotations in the other formats.
   This is a useful building block when implementing functionality
   that needs to partially evaluate annotations while a class is being constructed.
```

Author: Thanks, pushing a version of this.

   *owner* is the object that owns the annotation function, usually a function, class, or module.
   If provided, it is used in the :attr:`~Format.FORWARDREF` format to produce a :class:`ForwardRef`
   object that carry more information.

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. class:: Format

   An :class:`~enum.IntEnum` describing the formats in which annotations can be returned.
   Members of the enum, or their equivalent integer values, can be passed to
   :func:`get_annotations` and other functions in this module, as well as to
   :attr:`~object.__annotate__` functions.

   .. attribute:: VALUE
      :value: 1

      Values are the result of evaluating the annotation expressions.

   .. attribute:: FORWARDREF
      :value: 2

      Values are real annotation values (as per :attr:`Format.VALUE` format) for defined values,
      and :class:`ForwardRef` proxies for undefined values. Real objects may be exposed to,

>       or contain references to, :class:`ForwardRef` proxy objects.

Reviewer: What does an object being "exposed" to a ForwardRef mean here?

Author: I'm not sure, I got this wording from PEP 649. I'll just remove the "exposed to" part.

      Evaluate the forward reference, returning its value.

      This may throw an exception such as :exc:`NameError` if the forward reference
      refers to names that do not exist. The arguments to this method can be used to
      provide bindings for names that would otherwise be undefined.

      :class:`~ForwardRef` instances returned by :func:`get_annotations` retain
      references to information about the scope they originated from, so calling
      this method with no further arguments may be sufficient to evaluate such objects.
      :class:`~ForwardRef` instances created by other means may not have any information
      about their scope, so passing arguments to this method may be necessary to
      evaluate them successfully.

      *globals* and *locals* are passed to :func:`eval()`, representing the global and
      local namespaces in which the name is evaluated. *type_params*, if given, must be
      a tuple of :ref:`type parameters <type-params>` that are in scope while the forward
      reference is being evaluated. *owner* is the object that owns the annotation from
      which the forward reference derives, usually a function, class, or module.

>       Once a :class:`~ForwardRef` instance has been evaluated, it caches the evaluated
>       value, and future calls to :meth:`evaluate` will return the cached value, regardless
>       of the parameters passed in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      .. important::

         Once a :class:`~ForwardRef` instance has been evaluated, it caches the evaluated
         value, and future calls to :meth:`evaluate` will return the cached value, regardless
         of the parameters passed in.
```

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. function:: get_annotate_function(obj)

   Retrieve the :term:`annotate function` for *obj*. Return ``None`` if *obj* does not have an
   annotate function.

   This is usually equivalent to accessing the :attr:`~object.__annotate__` attribute of *obj*,
   but direct access to the attribute may return the wrong object in certain situations involving

>    metaclasses. It is recommended to use this function instead of accessing the attribute directly.

Reviewer: Active voice:
```suggestion
   metaclasses. This function should be used instead of accessing the attribute directly.
```

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. function:: get_annotations(obj, *, globals=None, locals=None, eval_str=False, format=Format.VALUE)

   Compute the annotations dict for an object.

   *obj* may be a callable, class, module, or other object with
   :attr:`~object.__annotate__` and :attr:`~object.__annotations__` attributes.
   Passing in an object of any other type raises :exc:`TypeError`.

>    The *format* parameter controls the format in which annotations are returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The *format* parameter controls the format in which annotations are returned,
   and must be a member of the :class:`Format` enum or its integer equivalent.
```

   Members of the enum, or their equivalent integer values, can be passed to
   :func:`get_annotations` and other functions in this module, as well as to
   :attr:`~object.__annotate__` functions.

   .. attribute:: VALUE
      :value: 1

      Values are the result of evaluating the annotation expressions.

   .. attribute:: FORWARDREF
      :value: 2

      Values are real annotation values (as per :attr:`Format.VALUE` format) for defined values,
      and :class:`ForwardRef` proxies for undefined values. Real objects may
      contain references to, :class:`ForwardRef` proxy objects.

   .. attribute:: SOURCE
      :value: 3

      Values are the text string of the annotation as it appears in the source code,
      up to modifications including, but not restricted to, whitespace normalizations
      and constant values optimizations.

      The exact values of these strings may change in future versions of Python.

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. class:: ForwardRef

   A proxy object for forward references in annotations.

   Instances of this class are returned when the :attr:`~Format.FORWARDREF` format is

>    used and annotations contain a name that cannot be resolved.  This can happen

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   used and annotations contain a name that cannot be resolved. This can happen
```

Author: Thanks! Applying these changes manually since I have some other local changes pending.

   when a forward reference is used in an annotation, such as when a class is
   referenced before it is defined.

   .. attribute:: __forward_arg__

      A string containing the code that was evaluated to produce the :class:`~ForwardRef`.
      The string may not be exactly equivalent to the original source.

   .. method:: evaluate(*, globals=None, locals=None, type_params=None, owner=None)

      Evaluate the forward reference, returning its value.

>       This may throw an exception such as :exc:`NameError` if the forward reference

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      This may throw an exception, such as :exc:`NameError`, if the forward reference
```

      a tuple of :ref:`type parameters <type-params>` that are in scope while the forward
      reference is being evaluated. *owner* is the object that owns the annotation from
      which the forward reference derives, usually a function, class, or module.

      .. important::

         Once a :class:`~ForwardRef` instance has been evaluated, it caches the evaluated
         value, and future calls to :meth:`evaluate` will return the cached value, regardless
         of the parameters passed in.

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. function:: get_annotate_function(obj)

   Retrieve the :term:`annotate function` for *obj*. Return :const:`!None` if *obj* does not have an
   annotate function.

   This is usually equivalent to accessing the :attr:`~object.__annotate__` attribute of *obj*,
   but direct access to the attribute may return the wrong object in certain situations involving
   metaclasses. This function should be used instead of accessing the attribute directly.

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. function:: get_annotations(obj, *, globals=None, locals=None, eval_str=False, format=Format.VALUE)

>    Compute the annotations dict for an object.

Reviewer 3: For my understanding, is there some best practice for when we should use  :class:`dict` vs. just dict?

Author: I don't think there's a hard-and-fast rule. Part of me wants to always add a link for consistency, but when I suggested that for :const:`None` in the past, people rightly pushed back that these links probably aren't useful for most readers. One way to think of it: If you're an advanced enough Python programmer to be reading these docs, you probably don't need to be told what a dict is.

In this particular case, the real reason is that I copied the docs from https://docs.python.org/3/library/inspect.html#inspect.get_annotations, which use unlinked "dict".

Reviewer 3: Yeah, that's fair. I was reading and realized that the links for types are used pretty inconsistently across the docs. I couldn't discern if this was backed by some general rules that I was unaware of...but yeah, totally agree. I don't know if it'd be super useful here. Thanks for clarifying!

Reviewer 4: @savannahostrowski Yeah there is definitely inconsistency and a bit of personal preference about the distraction of too many links.

   *obj* may be a callable, class, module, or other object with
   :attr:`~object.__annotate__` and :attr:`~object.__annotations__` attributes.
   Passing in an object of any other type raises :exc:`TypeError`.

   The *format* parameter controls the format in which annotations are returned,
   and must be a member of the :class:`Format` enum or its integer equivalent.

>    Returns a dict.  :func:`!get_annotations` returns a new dict every time

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Returns a dict. :func:`!get_annotations` returns a new dict every time
```

   it's called; calling it twice on the same object will return two
   different but equivalent dicts.

   This function handles several details for you:

   * If *eval_str* is true, values of type :class:`!str` will
     be un-stringized using :func:`eval`.  This is intended
     for use with stringized annotations
     (``from __future__ import annotations``). It is an error
     to set *eval_str* to true with formats other than :attr:`Format.VALUE`.
   * If *obj* doesn't have an annotations dict, returns an

>      empty dict.  (Functions and methods always have an

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     empty dict. (Functions and methods always have an
```

     annotations dict; classes, modules, and other types of
     callables may not.)
   * Ignores inherited annotations on classes, as well as annotations

>      on metaclasses.  If a class

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     on metaclasses. If a class
```

:mod:`!annotationlib` --- Functionality for introspecting annotations
=====================================================================

.. module:: annotationlib
   :synopsis: Functionality for introspecting annotations

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/annotationlib.py`

.. testsetup:: default

   import annotationlib
   from annotationlib import *

--------------

The :mod:`!annotationlib` module provides tools for introspecting
:term:`annotations <annotation>` on modules, classes, and functions.

Annotations are :ref:`lazily evaluated <lazy-evaluation>` and often contain
forward references to objects that are not yet defined when the annotation

> is created. This module provides a set of low-level tools that consumers
> of annotations can use to retrieve annotations in a reliable way, even

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
is created. This module provides a set of low-level tools that can be used to retrieve annotations in a reliable way, even
```

  in Python 3.7 and newer; see :pep:`563`): Annotations are stored as
  strings only.
* *Deferred evaluation* (default in Python 3.14 and newer; see :pep:`649` and
  :pep:`749`): Annotations are evaluated lazily, only when they are accessed.

As an example, consider the following program::

   def func(a: Cls) -> None:
       print(a)

   class Cls: pass

   print(func.__annotations__)

This will behave as follows:

* Under stock semantics (Python 3.13 and earlier), it will throw a
  :exc:`NameError` at the line where ``func`` is defined,
  because ``Cls`` is an undefined name at that point.
* Under stringified annotations (if ``from __future__ import annotations``
  is used), it will print ``{'a': 'Cls', 'return': 'None'}``.
* Under deferred evaluation (Python 3.14 and later), it will print
  ``{'a': <class 'Cls'>, 'return': None}``.

Stock semantics were used when function annotations were first introduced
in Python 3.0 (by :pep:`3107`) because this was the simplest, most obvious
way to implement annotations. The same execution model was used when variable
annotations were introduced in Python 3.6 (by :pep:`526`). However,

> stock semantics caused problems for users using annotations as type hints,
> which frequently need to refer to names that are not yet defined when the
> annotation is encountered. In addition, there were performance problems

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
stock semantics caused problems when using annotations as type hints,
such as a need to refer to names that are not yet defined when the
annotation is encountered. In addition, there were performance problems
```
